---
layout: post
title: "A short history of the origins of the Russia-Ukraine conflict"
date: 2022-03-14 14:51:29 +0100
categories: all
---
Why did we end up in this conflict?

Let's go back to 2014, Viktor Yushchenko is president in Ukraine. He was elected on the promise of a trade agreement with the European Union (EU). 
Except that Vladimir Putin wanted Ukraine to be part of his Eurasian Economic Union (EEU). He did everything he could (gas threats, investment promises, etc.) to prevent Ukraine from signing with the EU, even though the country could have signed with both unions. ) to prevent Ukraine from signing with the EU, when the country could have signed with both unions. This is what triggered the Maidan uprising (also known as Euromaidan).

It was a peaceful uprising, but Viktor Yushchenko decided to shoot the demonstrators. Many people died and the president fled to Russia.

I recommend the documentary Winter on Fire: Ukraine's Fight for Freedom below on youtube

<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzNxLzFfR5w">Winter on Fire</a>

or here if you can't access youtube

<video controls width="400">
    <source src="https://files.cetely.com/WinteronFire.webm"
            type="video/webm">
    <source src="https://files.cetely.com/WinteronFire.mp4"
            type="video/mp4">
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos.
</video>

Seeing this, for fear of losing the port of Sevastopol (we were only talking about a free trade agreement, not about joining the EU), Vladimir Putin took the opportunity to invade Crimea easily since the army was already there, Russia had a concession to host its military ships. 

Similarly in Donbass, under the pretext of a Russian language problem (a false problem but I will come back to it in another article), there were demonstrations with a lot of violence from pro-Russians. There were many deaths. From there, the war in Donbass started. Many Ukrainians fled to the west of Ukraine. I think we don't talk enough about those people who fled Donbass because of the pro-Russians. There are an estimated 1.5 million displaced people.

The army almost took over the territory but all of a sudden little green men appeared well equipped and the conflict froze. 

I would just point out that there have been as many deaths on both sides. When we talk about 14,000 dead since 2014, most of them died at the beginning of the war in 2014 and that figure is shared between the two belligerents.

That's why I denounce the reports of Anne-Laure Bonnel who each time gives us figures making us believe that the 14,000 dead are on the pro-Russian side.

Since 2014, the bombings have never stopped and for the last few weeks, strangely enough, the bombings on the pro-Russian side have increased. The Ukrainian president has always made sure that the army does not provoke the pro-Russians. He knew very well that Putin would use this pretext for the invasion. 

What is the Minsk Protocol? It is an agreement signed on 5 September 2014 by representatives of Ukraine, Russia, the Donetsk People's Republic (DNR) and the Lugansk People's Republic (LNR) to end the war in eastern Ukraine.

For details, I let you read the Wikipedia page:

* <a href="https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocole_de_Minsk">wikipedia FR</a>
* <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minsk_agreements#Minsk_Protocol">wikipedia EN</a>
* <a href="https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Минский_протокол">wikipedia RU</a>

Why did it fail? 
It is important to understand that the ceasefire was never respected. 
There were also too few observers to monitor the two parties and the entire front line.
The process did not go any further. 
It would have been normal for the displaced to participate in the vote but this was never mentioned.
The solution would have been for the UN to intervene but Russia never wanted to. One wonders why.

And NATO in all this? Ukraine has been working with NATO since 1991, as have many other countries, but nobody in Ukraine wanted to join NATO until 2014. It is the actions of Russia (invasion of Crimea and support of separatists) that made the population in its great majority began to fear Russia.

Of course the USA, France and Germany were against this integration and Putin knew it very well. 

Putin never digested that Ukraine turned to the WEST and what is happening is simply a revenge. He does not want any example of democracy in the former USSR countries. The Russian population should not be given any ideas. Putin prefers the feudal system.
<!--endtranslate-->

